Everything grows here on the other side all the
time. I visited Mexico and I really like it. I like
the people. They're more down to earth. People are
sitting like where I live now. Where do you live
now? Hampton, Virginia.
Uh-huh. There's no communication. You have to
walk into a public place. And it's just like, if
you're not there, you know, I'd say... I wanted to
explain that from China, Nuevo Leon was my
grandfather. China is a very interesting
town. Do you know anything about the history of
China? No, nothing. Well, here. One thing I'm not
sure about is was there anybody here in Rio Grande
City at all? Was there a town here before the
revolution? Okay. When you cross over here, the
history of this town used to be called Rancho
Davis. Rancho Davis. There used to be a man named
Davis that had a ranch. It was just a small ranch. It
was just a rancho with a little hamlet with a few...
Right. Right. That's what it is. When you crossed
the 13th of Camargo here, Was there a town here?
Yes. What was the population? How many people were
there? Very few and very poor. Very poor? Very
poor, the houses and everything. There were big
houses, the rich, but the poor people... But what
made them rich? No cattle? There was no
agriculture. No, there was agriculture, yes,
there was. And was it called Rancho Davis? Yes.
When you crossed, wasn't it called Rio Grande? I
don't remember. There's another name that he had.
What was the name of the other man that had the
violence? Baby Davis. No, I can't remember. It's
recorded. I've seen it written. But I don't know
which one was first, that one, and then this man
named Davis. This is a very old time. But as far as
having any real population of any size, it didn't
until Camargo moved over here. Before you crossed
Camargo, there was a few people here, but not so
many people until Camargo came. Yes, almost all
the big houses that are still there, and some that
have fallen already, the families were no longer
here. No? No. Only the houses alone? Only the
houses alone. Why is this town called Rio Grande
City and not Camargo Nuevo? A minister said, it's
not Rio, it's not Grande, it's not anything. And
then it's called Rio Grande. The important thing
is that they put it, but what was it called? It was
called Rancho Davis and it was called Rio Grande
when they put it. I don't remember. I don't
remember very well. Because I received letters
from here, from friends, from here to there. I
think it was... The question that you are
asking... Yes, I'm going to say it. I think it was
called this. After we came here, they put rivers.
The Rio Grande. But how did they put camales? But
Camargo was there. Camargo again? Yes. All of
Camargo is coming here? All of Camargo, but no, no,
no. You know that they were here because of them,
they couldn't let them go, they couldn't let them
go, they were here because of them. All the people
who crossed from Camargo thought of coming back.
We all thought of going if we didn't want to stay.
But the circumstances and the law of the parents,
what the parents say, well, I wanted to join. See,
all her brothers, not all her brothers, but her two
brothers and her sister, he came very wealthy
today and he became a very good businessman. So
there's no way that we go back and leave. They
started with the meat market. Well, what's the,
what's the name of the place? It's called Pum, Pum,
Pum, and that's one of her brothers. And the other
brother, what's his name? The other brother's
name is Suspirio. Suspirio. Suspirio. And they
own, they own the house. They started with
Marqueta, but now they're Tiendas y Marqueta.
Yes. Yes, but the brothers of the mother, of the
mother's, what, they were also marketers, right?
Yes, my grandfather was also a marketer. Your
grandfather was also a marketer. My grandfather
was also a marketer. Yes, there were. Yes, there
were. Yes, there were. Yes, there were. Yes, there
were. Yes, there were. Yes, there
were. Yes, there were. And my uncle Rafael, the
eldest son of my father, is a marketer. And the
boys, my uncle Rafael's children, are marketeers
in Camargo. It's like an inheritance, I say. And my
brothers also worked as marketeers. They all
worked in the service, they were workers. Two
brothers, Martínez. And I have three careers
left. They are the ones I have now. What was your
father's or your brother's father? Or what was
your father's father? He used to work in that ranch
called the surf system. In Spanish they call it
peones. He used to work as a peon and he came here to
the north of Mexico. What was his name? Wasn't it
his father? It was his grandfather. My
grandfather was the one who came. He was the one who
ran away from China. He was a peon. He was a peon. In
China? The
reserve
system, you know, we never advance. So basically
what happened is that he was a peon, an hacienda or
something near China and got away from that and
came up here to Camargo where he had a chance to do
something on his own. The old people were very bad,
how can I say, bosses. They would take a boy to work
at the ranch for 8 or 10 years and they wouldn't let
him leave his family or anything. They would kill
him. They were very hard. Yes, the bosses from the
past. But your father didn't have a boss. No, he had
people working. He didn't work, he had people. Ah,
he was a boss. That was your father, right? My
father, yes. We never worked outside. We, young
women, big, from Martínez, She taught me how to
sew, how to embroider, how to crochet, how to do a
lot of things with my hands. That was my job as a
seamstress.
to make things like that to put on the tables and
then they used it. Now they put it on the floor. It is
the custom in many places for the ladies to do many
things. Yes, sewing. Yes. And they say that I am
cheap for clothes. Well, yes, because I knew how to
do it. I can't do them well. I know a lot about life.
Who founded Camargo? Because you lived there,
right? When you were born in Camargo, what
inspired you to go to that city? Why is it called
Camargo? You were called Camargo because of
General Camargo, right? Maybe that's what they
say. There's a general, a famous Mexican general
named Camargo. There was a school in the town, the
public said it was for the government, for men in
one place and for women in another. They didn't
count as they do now. They had separate schools.
They used to wear, instead of, you know, now that
the group
was theirs,
They did it in this country also, where they wore
just a cloth to flatten down. You know, that's the
way she was brought up. The higher relatives, you
know. It's true. Los padres estaban muy delicados
en esos días, sí. Era muy bueno, es muy bueno. La
disciplina. Sí, disciplina. ¿Cuándo? Sí. At that
time they didn't have birth control pills.
Discipline is still a good idea. Cass has become
completely obsolete.
¿En qué modo se encuentra con su esposo? ¿Usted?
¿Su esposo? Yes, but I never danced with him. No,
no. I danced with others.
And they told me in my house that I hadn't met him
before. Well, they gave him a thousand kisses.
What I can't understand is how do you get to know
people if you don't let them go out? That's what I
say too. Why did they do that? I don't know. I met my
children and I did. My children had a boyfriend.
They talked to me, I told them, they went to the
dance, I took them. If they were there behind us,
what would they do to me? That was my law here. But
how did the man know, as if he had asked a woman, how
do you know if he wants to marry you? No, well,
that's how you talk, that's how you know him. Like
me, my husband, I didn't even know his voice. And we
were very happy to see him. And I didn't know him, I
didn't talk to him, I couldn't. Well, they would
wake me up and scold me when they asked me that his
sisters had made me fall in love with him. And I
would say, yes, mamacita, then, no, mamacita, no.
They appreciated me, they loved me. pero nunca me
dijeron quién es mi mamá. Eran también detenidas
de su boca. Sí, me visitaban y yo, un poco, pero nos
visitábamos. Pero él no sabía de parar dónde yo
estaba ahí en su casa. Y con esa condición iba, que
no fuera él a estar ahí. Para que vea lo que la
castigaban a uno. Mis hijas no. Mis hijos no.
Bueno, cuando su papá
How do you say it? I understand that you have a
boyfriend. What does he do? He repels. What? He
repels, he scolds me. Oh. Yes. He never scolds me.
The last time I gave him a kiss because I knew he
wasn't good. And he didn't go. He's still
suffering. Poor child. But I used to talk to those
other boys. I was at the school and they invited me
to go to their house. What did they do? I didn't talk
to them. They didn't do anything. How do you get
married if you don't know them? Getting married
without knowing them is very hard. But when your
mother got married, your uncle... My grandfather
died and
she remarried a year later
with the
man that worked for her. So her grandfather, you
know, was a poet. Yes, because my mother had very
good help. Yes, with the children of a big father.
He gave him, he gave one part and another part, and
that he gave him a certain amount of little animals
so that that man would also have them and help him
with pleasure. That's how he did it with my
grandfather. Yes. But when he got married, he
turned into a... He didn't want to. Well, maybe
not. I say no, not at all. First, I also said it was
bad because she had a lot of children, mom, and she
was fighting with children and all that. And now I
say, no, what would have been of me if I didn't have
my brothers? Now my brothers see me as... They got
two general, two sets of family, her family,
because they're all gone except her. And then they
got the new marriage. Yeah. She got about 12 more
kids. No, no, I say, thank God. Those are the only
uncles we know. That she married, mom, and she gave
me those beautiful and good brothers, my brother.
The Martins both died, but both have left
children. One has one and two children. Heraldo
Tango came. Heraldo, the brother of Quino. I
didn't know him, he rang the doorbell and said,
shut up, sir. What do you want? I'm Heraldo. No, I
don't know him, I don't know him either. No, now
that he's so fat. Why did they come out so quiet? Why
did they come out so quiet? It's because
her mother is a woman. And then I had another
brother. And I have my nephews. And I have my
nephews. But I wouldn't have anyone to see me if my
brothers didn't see me very, very well. They are
very careful with me. And my nephews, my children,
my brothers, men, they see me very carefully. They
love me very much, their father, and they too. And
their mother is very good with me. Very good with
that family too.
What else can I say? It's interesting. The thing is
that I wish they didn't record. See, her mother, my
grandmother, by trade, she was a midwife. In those
times, there were no doctors. She was by
profession a midwife. And as late as, I can't
remember when, in investigations concerning
people's birth, where they were born, they would
come. I'm explaining to you that they would come
and ask the older mother, When they were
investigating where a person had been born,
because she was part of it. They would come and ask
her where this person had been born, because there
was no paper. Nothing was recorded. It's bad that
there was nothing recorded. Because he also lived
75 years. And I'm already 78. And I haven't been
able to go to rest. Because death is rest. Ya en la
edad mía, de la edad. Una gente joven, no. Pero una
gente vieja ya no puede hacer sus trabajos ni como
los querían ni como quieren. Es duro y es pesado. Y
vivo sola. ¿Y qué pasaba si yo mandaba a pedir a una
muchacha para mandar a la comisión, así como si
dices que? Y si les decían que no, ¿qué pasaba?
Pues, ¿quién sabe? How about if your parents said
no? They said no and no and no. If my parents had been
very tough for that, the state would have been very
tough. I say it shouldn't be like that. My
sons-in-law, those boys that came, they are like
my children to me. They see me as a mother. So I don't
suffer because of the mandate, I don't suffer
because of anything, they buy everything from me.
They are good, because I loved them and I love them.
The one I least wanted was Domingo, the one who
served me the most. I didn't want them to get
married. In Camargo, before the Revolution, were
there richer families than us? Yes. Capital was
everything there was. Capital was all the wealth
there was. And sowing. But sowing on time. You
know, it doesn't rain all the time. You don't
harvest all the time. The sowing there, where
there's no irrigation, there's no security. When
you process some people, you're supposed to say
excuse me. Excuse me. All right. We were also
farmers and we lived in the ranches. It was like we
made cattle and cows and everything in the
ranches. Yes, but all the families are the same or
are there differences? No, there are very lazy
people who don't like to work. And there are people
who like to just give the weight and spend it. There
is the difference according to the customs. You
know what she's saying? The people that work will
well off and the people that don't well off. Right,
right. Some people well off because they like to
work. Yeah. But the differences then, basically,
she's saying the differences came out of that
rather than, you know, being a matter of work and
this sort of thing. Camargo is very old. Yes, yes.
And now how many people live there? It seems to us
that there are people. It's small. Small. And what
I don't like are the houses. How many people live
here in Rio Grande City now? The last count was
about 5,000. 5,000. I don't know. I'll see what the
phone book
says. And most of the people who live now in Rio
Grande City were from Camargo? Or were they from
Camargo ancestors? Are you still
interested